Blog: consistent lookup vindex (#1730)
vitessio/website: content/en/blog/2024-04-25-consistent-lookup-vindex.md

---
author: 'Harshit Gangal, Deepthi Sigireddi'
date: 2024-04-25
slug: '2024-04-25-consistent-lookup-vindex'
tags: ['Vitess', 'PlanetScale', 'MySQL', 'Query Serving', 'Vindex']

> title: 'Consistent Lookup Vindex Approach to Data Consistency without 2PC'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: 'Consistent Lookup Vindex: Achieving Data Consistency without 2PC'
```

- Commit on Pre
- Commit on Main
- Commit on Post

A failure in any of these steps rolls back the remaining open transactions in the same order.

Let’s look at an example to see how this works.
#### Sample Rows:
```shell
USER:
+-----+------+------------+-----------------+
| id  | name | phone      | email           |
+-----+------+------------+-----------------+
| 100 | Alex | 8877991122 | alex@mail.com   |
| 200 | Emma | 8811229988 | emma@mail.com   |
+-----+------+------------+-----------------+

NAME_USER_VDX:
+------+-----+--------------------------+
| name | id  | keyspace_id              |
+------+-----+--------------------------+
| Alex | 100 | 0x313030                 |
| Emma | 200 | 0x323030                 |
+------+-----+--------------------------+

PHONE_USER_VDX:
+------------+--------------------------+
| phone      | keyspace_id              |
+------------+--------------------------+
| 8811229988 | 0x323030                 |
| 8877991122 | 0x313030                 |
+------------+--------------------------+
```

### Delete Operation:

> Deletion of Lookup Vindex Tables data happens through the Post Connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deletion of Lookup Vindex table data happens through the **Post** connection.
```

NAME_USER_VDX:
+------+-----+--------------------------+
| name | id  | keyspace_id              |
+------+-----+--------------------------+
| Alex | 100 | 0x313030                 |
| Emma | 200 | 0x323030                 |
+------+-----+--------------------------+

PHONE_USER_VDX:
+------------+--------------------------+
| phone      | keyspace_id              |
+------------+--------------------------+
| 8811229988 | 0x323030                 |
| 8877991122 | 0x313030                 |
+------------+--------------------------+
```

If a select query is received
`select count(*) from user where name = 'Alex'`

A lookup call will happen with `name = 'Alex'` to the `name_user_vdx` vindex which will return the shard destination with keyspace_id of `0x313030`. When the query is sent down to the specific shard a matching row does not exist in the `User` table any longer and hence will return no results.

```shell
+----------+
| count(*) |
+----------+
|        0 |
+----------+
```

The lookup vindex table may be inconsistent with the `User` table but the results returned for the query remained consistent with the `User` table.

### Insert Operation:

> Insertion of Lookup Vindex Tables data happens through the Pre Connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Insertion of Lookup Vindex table data happens through the **Pre** connection.
```

      No error as `name` is a non-unique column.
   2. `insert into phone_user_vdx(phone, keyspace_id) values (8877991122, '0x333030')`
   
      This results in a duplicate key error as it is a unique column. Note that this row is left over from the error we got during the previous delete operation. We’ll get into the details of how this is handled in a minute.
2. Insert the User table Row
   **Main:** `insert into user(id, name, phone, email) values (300, 'Emma', 8877991122, 'xyz@mail.com')`

**Handling of Duplicate Key Error in Lookup Vindex:**
1. Lock the lookup row so that no other transaction can race with the current operation.
   
   **Pre:** `select phone, keyspace_id from phone_user_vdx where phone = 8877991122 for update`
2. Lock the main table row to ensure that the row we want to insert does not exist yet and no other transaction can race with the current operation.
   1. **Main:** `select phone from user where phone = 8877991122 for update`
   Because we previously deleted the corresponding row for this select, it will return no results. This tells us that the lookup vindex table has an orphan row which can be updated with the new value from the insert statement.

>    2. **Pre-Transaction:** `update phone_user_vdx set keyspace_id = ‘0x333030’ where phone = 8877991122`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   2. **Pre:** `update phone_user_vdx set keyspace_id = ‘0x333030’ where phone = 8877991122`
```

Author: done.

#### Updated Rows:
```shell
USER:
+-----+------+------------+-----------------+
| id  | name | phone      | email           |
+-----+------+------------+-----------------+
| 200 | Emma | 8811229988 | emma@mail.com   |
| 300 | Emma | 8877991122 | xyz@mail.com    |
+-----+------+------------+-----------------+

NAME_USER_VDX:
+------+-----+--------------------------+
| name | id  | keyspace_id              |
+------+-----+--------------------------+
| Alex | 100 | 0x313030                 |
| Emma | 200 | 0x323030                 |
| Emma | 300 | 0x333030                 |
+------+-----+--------------------------+

PHONE_USER_VDX:
+------------+--------------------------+
| phone      | keyspace_id              |
+------------+--------------------------+
| 8811229988 | 0x323030                 |
| 8877991122 | 0x333030                 |
+------------+--------------------------+
```

### Update Operation:

> Update of Lookup Vindex Tables data happens through a Delete Operation followed by an Insert Operation. We already know that Delete Operation is handled through Post connection and Insert Operation through Pre connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update of Lookup Vindex table data happens through a Delete operation followed by an Insert operation. We already know that Delete operation is handled through **Post** connection and Insert operation through **Pre** connection.
```

> In a special case, where vindex column data is unchanged, it will cause `lock wait timeout` on the Insert Operation (Pre-Transaction) as the lock will be held by Delete Operation (Post-Transaction). To mitigate this, Vitess handles this case well and updating vindex column data with the same value as before is turned into a no-op for the lookup vindex tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the special case of an update where the vindex column value is unchanged, it will cause `lock wait timeout` on the Insert operation (on the **Pre** connection) as the row lock will be held by the Delete operation (on the **Post** connection). To mitigate this, updating vindex column data with the same value as before is turned into a no-op for lookup vindex tables.
```
